úúúú


Absolution
Absolution = Act by which a priest, acting as the agent of Christ, grants forgiveness of sins in the Sacrament of Reconciliation.
Acolytes
Acolytes = Ones who assist in the celebration (i.e., carrying candles, holding the Pope’s staff, miter, etc.).

Adoration = Refers to the external acts of reverent admiration or honor given to a thing or person.
Adoration
Adoration of the Blessed Sacrament
Adoration of the Blessed Sacrament  = Prayer to Christ, who is recognized as being truly present in the Sacrament. During Adoration, the Blessed Sacrament is displayed for the people.

Alb The white garment covering one’s street clothes.

Alleluia Acclamation = This acclamation of praise to God follows the second reading and prepares the assembly for the Gospel.
Alleluia Acclamation

Altar = A table on which the sacrifice of the Mass is offered to God. It is the center of importance in the place where the Mass is celebrated. Also called: “The Table of the Lord.”
Altar
Amen = Hebrew word meaning truly, it is true. As concluding word of prayers it expresses assent to and acceptance of God’s will.
Amen
Apostle = Disciple Literally “one sent.” Normally this refers to the 12 men chosen by Jesus to be the bearers of his teachings to the world. The term “apostolic” generally refers back to the 12 apostles. In the Church it characterizes certain documents, appointments or structures initiated by the Pope or the Holy See. The term “disciple” refers to one who follows the teachings of Jesus.
Apostolic = Disciple Literally “one sent.” Normally this refers to the 12 men chosen by Jesus to be the bearers of his teachings to the world. The term “apostolic” generally refers back to the 12 apostles. In the Church it characterizes certain documents, appointments or structures initiated by the Pope or the Holy See. The term “disciple” refers to one who follows the teachings of Jesus.
Apostle
Apostolic
Apostolate = The ministry or work of an apostle. In Catholic usage, a term covering all kinds and areas of work and endeavor for the service of God and the Church and the good of people.
Apostolate
Apostolic Nunciature = The offices of the Holy Father’s representative to a country or to the Church in that country.
Apostolic Nunciature
Archbishop = Title given automatically to bishops who govern archdioceses.
Archbishop
Archdiocese = The chief diocese of an ecclesiastical province.
Archdiocese
Aspergillum = A vessel or device used for sprinkling holy water during special blessings. The ordinary type is a metallic rod with a bulbous tip which absorbs the holy water and discharges it at the motion of the user’s hand.
Aspergillum
Assembly = Those present to celebrate the liturgy. Other terms: to use: “The Community,” “The Church (as people not building),” “The Worshippers,” “The Faithful,” or “the congregation.” Avoid: Spectators, Crowd, Audience—all passive words which do not reflect what those present at Mass do. NOTE: It is the entire assembly (ordained and nonordained) that celebrates the liturgy of the Mass, therefore avoid: The Pope’s Mass, The Bishop’s Mass, His Mass, etc.–all terms which would give the impression that it is only the Pope or clergy who celebrate Mass.
Assembly
Auxiliary Bishop = A bishop assigned to a Catholic diocese or archdiocese, to assist a residential bishop.
Auxiliary Bishop
Basilica = A church to which special privileges are attached. It is a title of honor given to various kinds of churches.
Basilica
Beatification = Final step toward canonization of a saint.
Beatification
Bishop = The chief priest of a diocese. Bishops are responsible for the pastoral care of their dioceses. In addition, bishops have a responsibility to act in council with other bishops to guide the Church.
Bishop
Blessed Sacrament = The Eucharist, the Body and Blood of Christ, whether at the Mass or reserved in a special place in the Church.
Blessed Sacrament
Book of Gospels = The book which contains the Gospel texts, from which the priest or deacon proclaims the Gospel of the day.
Book of Gospels
Bread and Wine = The elements used in the celebration of Eucharist (unleavened bread and natural pure wine). NOTE: After the Eucharistic Prayer the bread and wine is referred to as: “the consecrated bread and wine” or “the Body and Blood of Christ.” Catholics do not believe that the bread and wine are mere symbols; they believe the bread and wine actually become the Body and Blood of Christ.
Bread and Wine
Breaking of the Bread = The celebrant recreates gestures of Christ at the Last Supper when He broke the bread to give to His disciples. The action signifies that in communion the many are made one in the one Bread of Life which is Christ.
Breaking of the Bread
Brother = A man who is a member of a religious order, but is not ordained or studying for the priesthood.
Brother
Cana Conference = A Catholic family movement, originally designed to aid married couples and families in their spiritual and interpersonal relationships. The program is now divided into Pre-Cana, for couples engaged to be married, and Cana Conferences, programs for married people.
Cana Conference
Canon = Greek for rule, norm, standard, measure. Designates the Canon of Sacred Scripture, the list of books recognized by the Church as inspired by the Holy Spirit.
Canon
Canon Law = Canon Law, Code of - The collection of laws (canons) governing administration of the Roman Catholic Church. All aspects of Church life are addressed in the Code, including its administrative structure, the sacraments, and the teaching office of the Church, among others.
Canon Law
Canonization = A declaration by the Pope that a person who died a martyr or practiced Christian virtue to a heroic degree is in heaven and is worthy of honor and imitation by the faithful. Verification of miracles is required for canonization (except for martyrs).
Canonization
Cantor = One who leads the singing during the liturgy (i.e., the responsorial psalm).
Cantor
Cardinal = Cardinals are appointed by the Pope and constitute the senate of the Church. They aid the Pope as his chief counselors.
Cardinal
Cassock = A non-liturgical, full-length, close-fitting robe for use by priests and other clerics under liturgical vestments; usually black for priests, purple for bishops and other prelates, red for cardinals, and white for the Pope.
Cassock
Catechesis = Religious instruction and formation for persons preparing for baptism (catechumens) and for the faithful in various stages of spiritual development.
Catechesis
Catechetical = Referring to catechesis.
Catechetical
Catechetics = From the Greek meaning “to sound forth,” it is the procedure for teaching religion.
Catechetics
Cathedral = The major church in an archdiocese or diocese. It is the seat of the local Ordinary (diocesan bishop, religious superior or other authority).
Cathedral
Catholic = Greek word for universal. First used in the title Catholic Church in a letter written by St. Ignatius of Antioch to the Christians of Smyrna about 107 A.D.
Catholic
Catholic Campaign for Human Development = The US Catholic bishops’ domestic anti-poverty program. Started in 1970, it is funded through an annual collection in Catholic parishes.
Catholic Campaign for Human Development
Catholic Relief Services = Overseas aid agency established by Catholics in the United States.
Catholic Relief Services
Celebrant = The one who presides at the celebration of the Eucharist.
Celebrant
Celebrant’s Chair = The place where the celebrant sits during the Liturgy. It expresses his office of presiding over the assembly and of leading the prayer of those present.
Celebrant’s Chair
Celebrator = Used only to describe a participant in a nonreligious celebration.
Celebrator
Chalice = The cup used to hold the wine that is consecrated to become the Blood of Christ.
Chalice
Chancellor = The chief archivist of the official records of a diocese. Also a notary and secretary of the diocesan curia.
Chancellor
Charism = A spiritual gift given for the good of the Church to an individual or a group of people, especially in a religious community. Men and women religious reflect a specific aspect of the life of Jesus Christ and contribute to the building up of the Church through their charism. Examples: Christ the Preacher (Dominicans), Christ the Healer (brothers and sisters who serve in health care).
Charism
Charisms = Gifts or graces given by God to persons for the good of others and the Church.
Charisms
Chasuble = The vestment worn over the alb by priests, bishops and Pope when celebrating the Mass.
Chasuble
Chor bishop = In the Maronite rite and the Greek Orthodox Church an auxiliary bishop may be called a chor bishop. When used in other Eastern Catholic rites it is an honorary term for a close assistant of a bishop, usually the equivalent of a vicar general.
Chor bishop
Christ = The title of Jesus, derived from Greek translation Kyrios of the Hebrew term Messiah, meaning the Anointed of God.
Christ
Church = The universal Church that is spread throughout the world; the local Church is that of a particular locality, such as a diocese. The Church embraces all its members—on earth, in heaven and in purgatory.
Church
Ciborium = A vessel used to hold the consecrated bread for the distribution of the Body of Christ during communion.
Ciborium
Clergy = Collective term referring to male persons who administer the rites of the Church through Holy Orders.
Clergy
Cloister = Part of a convent or monastery reserved for use by members of the order that live in that facility.
Cloister
CMSWR = Council of Major Superiors of Women Religious. Organization of major superiors approved by the Holy See for the purpose of assisting the individual institutes of the members, transacting common business, and fostering suitable coordination and cooperation with the conferences of bishops and also with individual bishops.
CMSWR
College of Cardinals = The College of Cardinals is made up of the cardinals of the Church, who advise the Pope, assist in the central administration of the Church, head the various curial offices and congregations, administer the Holy See during a vacancy, and elect a new Pope.
College of Cardinals
College of Consultors =A consultative group of priests, appointed to five-year terms by the Archbishop from among members of the Presbyteral Council, which fulfills various functions specified in the Code of Canon Law and assists the Archbishop as needed.
College of Consultors
Collegiality = The shared responsibility and authority that the whole college of bishops, headed by the Pope, has for the teaching, sanctification and government of the Church.
Collegiality
Communion Song = The music that is used as the consecrated bread and wine – the Body and Blood of Christ – is distributed to the faithful.
Communion Song
Concelebrants = Those priests and bishops who join the Celebrant in celebrating the Mass.
Concelebrants
Concluding Rite = The brief rite which consists of the celebrant’s greeting to all present, final blessing and dismissal; followed by a concluding song and concluding procession.
Concluding Rite
Conference of Major Superiors of Men (CMSM) = Organization of major superiors representing communities of men religious in the United States.
Conference of Major Superiors of Men (CMSM)
Confession = Part of the sacrament of penance or reconciliation, not a term for the sacrament.
Confession
Confirmation = One of the three sacraments of initiation, along with Baptism and Eucharist.
Confirmation
Consecration = The prayer and blessing during which the bread and wine become the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ.
Consecration
Contemplative = A religious man or woman who devotes his/her entire life in the cloister to prayer and reflection.
Contemplative
Convent = In common usage, the term refers to a house of women religious.
Convent
Crosier = (pastoral staff) The staff which a bishop carries when he presides at the liturgy.
Crosier
Cross bearer = The one who carries the cross in the procession (entrance and recessional).
Cross bearer
Cross = An object is a crucifix only if it depicts Christ on a cross, otherwise it is a cross.
Cross
Crucifix = An object is a crucifix only if it depicts Christ on a cross, otherwise it is a cross.
Crucifix

Dalmatic = The vestment the deacon wears over the alb on solemn occasions.
Dalmatic
Deacon = An ordained minister who assists the Celebrant during the Liturgy of the Word and at the altar for the Liturgy of the Eucharist.
Deacon
Deacons = The diaconate is the first order or grade in ordained ministry. Any man who is to be ordained to the priesthood must first be ordained as a transitional deacon. Deacons serve in the ministry of liturgy, of the word, and of charity. The Permanent Diaconate is for men who do not plan to become ordained priests. The program is open to both married and unmarried men.
Deacons
Diaconate = The diaconate is the first order or grade in ordained ministry. Any man who is to be ordained to the priesthood must first be ordained as a transitional deacon. Deacons serve in the ministry of liturgy, of the word, and of charity. The Permanent Diaconate is for men who do not plan to become ordained priests. The program is open to both married and unmarried men.
Diaconate
Dean = The title of a priest appointed by the bishop to aid him in administering the parishes in a certain vicinity, called a “deanery.” The function of a dean involves promotion, coordination, and supervision of the common pastoral activity within the deanery or vicariate.
Dean
Vicar = The title of a priest appointed by the bishop to aid him in administering the parishes in a certain vicinity, called a “deanery.” The function of a dean involves promotion, coordination, and supervision of the common pastoral activity within the deanery or vicariate.
Vicar
Deaneries = A regional subdivision of the Archdiocese. The Archdiocese of St. Louis comprises 10 deaneries: North City and South City (comprising the City of St. Louis); Northeast County, Northwest County, Southeast County, and Southwest County (comprising St. Louis County); Ste. Genevieve (comprising Ste. Genevieve, St. Francois, and Perry counties); Festus (comprising Jefferson and Washington counties); Washington (comprising Franklin and Warren Counties); and St. Charles (comprising St. Charles and Lincoln counties).
Deaneries
Deanery = A regional subdivision of the Archdiocese. The Archdiocese of St. Louis comprises 10 deaneries: North City and South City (comprising the City of St. Louis); Northeast County, Northwest County, Southeast County, and Southwest County (comprising St. Louis County); Ste. Genevieve (comprising Ste. Genevieve, St. Francois, and Perry counties); Festus (comprising Jefferson and Washington counties); Washington (comprising Franklin and Warren Counties); and St. Charles (comprising St. Charles and Lincoln counties).
Deanery
Deanery = A regional subdivision of the Archdiocese. The Archdiocese of St. Louis comprises 10 deaneries: North City and South City (comprising the City of St. Louis); Northeast County, Northwest County, Southeast County, and Southwest County (comprising St. Louis County); Ste. Genevieve (comprising Ste. Genevieve, St. Francois, and Perry counties); Festus (comprising Jefferson and Washington counties); Washington (comprising Franklin and Warren Counties); and St. Charles (comprising St. Charles and Lincoln counties).
Deanery

Diocesan Curia = The personnel and offices assisting the bishop in directing the pastoral activity, administration and exercise of judicial power of the diocese.
Diocesan Curia
Diocese = A particular church; a fully organized ecclesiastical jurisdiction under the pastoral direction of a bishop as local Ordinary.
Diocese
Dispensation = An exemption from Church law.
Dispensation
Doxology = The response of the people acclaiming the sovereignty of God.
Doxology
Eastern-Rite (Oriental) = Church Term used to describe the Catholic churches which developed in Eastern Europe, Asia, and Africa. They have their own distinctive liturgical and organizational systems. Each is considered equal to the Latin rite within the Church.
Eastern-Rite (Oriental)
Ecclesial = Having to do with the Church in general or the life of the Church.
Ecclesial
Ecclesiastical = Refers to official structures or legal and organizational aspects of the Church.
Ecclesiastical
Ecumenical = A movement for spiritual understanding and unity among Christians and their churches. The term also is extended to apply to efforts toward greater understanding and cooperation between Christians and members of other faiths.
Ecumenical
Encyclical = A pastoral letter addressed by the Pope to the whole Church.
Encyclical
Entrance Procession = Priest, deacon, altar servers, lectors, enter the church or designated place for celebration of the liturgy.
Entrance Procession
Entrance Song = The song/music which takes place during the entrance procession.
Entrance Song
Entrance Music = The song/music which takes place during the entrance procession.
Entrance Music
Episcopal = Refers to a bishop or groups of bishops as a form of Church government, in which bishops have authority.
Episcopal
Eschatology = Doctrine concerning the last things: death, judgment, heaven and hell, and the final state of perfection of the people and the kingdom of God at the end of the world.
Eschatology
Eucharistic Prayer = The prayer of thanksgiving and sanctification. It is the center and high point of the celebration. During the Eucharistic Prayer, the Church believes that the bread and wine become the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ.
Eucharistic Prayer
Evangelical = Refers to Christians who emphasize the need for a definite commitment to faith in Christ and a duty by believers to persuade others to accept Christ.
Evangelical
Evangelist = A preacher or revivalist who seeks conversions by preaching to groups.
Evangelist
Evening Prayer = Evening Prayer, most commonly known as Vespers, is the official prayer that marks the end of the day. It consists primarily of sung psalms and other readings from Scripture.
Evening Prayer
Exarch = A church jurisdiction, similar to a diocese, established for Eastern-rite Catholics living outside their native land. The head of an exarchy, usually a bishop, is an exarch.
Exarch
Exarchy = A church jurisdiction, similar to a diocese, established for Eastern-rite Catholics living outside their native land. The head of an exarchy, usually a bishop, is an exarch.
Exarchy
Excommunication = A penalty of censure by which a baptized person is excluded from the communion of the faithful for committing and remaining obstinate in certain serious offenses specified in canon law. Even though excommunicated, that person still is responsible for fulfillment of the normal obligations of a Catholic.
Excommunication
Focolare = A lay movement started in Trent, Italy by Chiara Lubich in 1943, now claiming more than a million followers. Its aim is world unity though the living witness of Christian love and holiness in the family and in small communities.
Focolare
Free Will = The faculty or capability of making a reasonable choice from among several alternatives.
Free Will
General Intercessions = Prayer of intercession for all of humankind; for the Church, civil authorities, those with various needs, for all peoples, and for the salvation of the world. The celebrant invites all to pray, another minister proclaims the prayers of petition and the assembly responds by asking God to hear and to grant their requests.
General Intercessions
Gloria = Ancient hymn of praise in which the Church glorifies God. It is used on all Sundays (outside of Advent and Lent), and at solemn celebrations. The text originates from the Christmas narrative in the Gospel of Luke (Luke 2:14).
Gloria
God = The infinitely perfect Supreme Being, uncaused and absolutely self-sufficient, eternal, the Creator and final end of all things. The one God subsists in three equal Persons: the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.
God
Grace = A free gift from God to human beings, grace is a created sharing in the life of God. It is given through the merits of Christ and is communicated by the Holy Spirit. Grace is necessary for salvation.
Grace
Greeting = The celebrant greets all pre-sent at the liturgy, expressing the presence of the Lord to the assembled community.
Greeting
Hermits = Persons who live alone, devoting themselves to Christ and the Church through prayer and meditation.
Hermits
Hierarchy = In general, the term refers to the ordered body of clergy, divided into bishops, priests, and deacons. In Catholic practice, the term refers to the bishops of the world or of a particular region.
Hierarchy
Holy Communion = After saying a preparatory prayer, the celebrant (or other designated ministers) gives communion (the consecrated bread and wine) to himself and the other ministers at the altar, and then communion is distributed to the congregation.
Holy Communion
Holy See 
Holy See = 1. The diocese of the Pope, Rome. 
Holy See = 2. The Pope himself or the various officials and bodies of the Church’s central administration— the Roman Curia — which act in the name and by authority of the Pope.
Homily = The homily (sermon) is a reflection by the celebrant or other minister on the Scripture readings and on the application of the texts in the daily lives of the assembled community.
Homily
Host, The Sacred = The bread under whose appearance Christ is and remains present in a unique manner after the consecration of the Mass.
Host, The Sacred
The Sacred Host
The Sacred Host =  = The bread under whose appearance Christ is and remains present in a unique manner after the consecration of the Mass.
Host
Host = The bread under whose appearance Christ is and remains present in a unique manner after the consecration of the Mass.
IHS = In Greek, the first three letters of the name of Jesus.
IHS
Immaculate Conception Catholic dogma concerning Mary and the name of a feast in her honor celebrated Dec. 8. It refers to the belief that Mary was without sin from the moment she was conceived.= 
Immaculate Conception
Incense = Incense (material used to produce a fragrant odor when burned) is used as a symbol of the Church’s offering; the rising smoke represents the prayers of the assembly rising to God.
Incense
Indulgence = The remission before God of the temporal punishment due for sins already forgiven.
Indulgence
Intercessions = A series of prayers for the Church, the world, the Pope, clergy and laity, and the dead. Final Doxology A final prayer of praise of God.
Intercessions
Intercommunion = The agreement or practice of two Ecclesial communities by which each admits members of the other communion to its sacraments.
Intercommunion
Jesus = The name of Jesus, meaning Savior in Christian usage, derived from the Aramaic and Hebrew Yeshua and Joshua, meaning Yahweh is salvation.
Jesus
Keys = Power of the Spiritual authority and jurisdiction in the Church, symbolized by the “keys” to the kingdom of heaven. Christ promised the keys to St. Peter and future heads of the Church.
Keys
Knights of Columbus
Knights of Columbus = Fraternal organization for Catholic men. Knights of Columbus engage in religious and charitable projects in the United States, Canada, Puerto Rico, Mexico, and the Philippines.

Lamb of God (“Agnus Dei ”) = An invocation during the breaking of the bread in which the assembly petitions God for mercy and peace.
Lamb of God (“Agnus Dei ”) 
Lay Ministries = These are ministries within the Church that are carried out by laypersons. Included are altar servers, Eucharistic ministers and lectors.
Lay Ministries
Layman
Layman = Any Church member who is neither ordained nor a member of a religious order. When the Second Vatican Council spoke of the laity, it used the term in this more common meaning.
Woman
Woman = Any Church member who is neither ordained nor a member of a religious order. When the Second Vatican Council spoke of the laity, it used the term in this more common meaning.
Person = Any Church member who is neither ordained nor a member of a religious order. When the Second Vatican Council spoke of the laity, it used the term in this more common meaning.
Person

LCWR
LCWR = Organization of major superiors, who represent more than 90 percent of the active women religious in the United States.
Leadership Conference of Women = Religious Organization of major superiors, who represent more than 90 percent of the active women religious in the United States.
Leadership Conference of Women
Lectern = The place from which the Scriptures are proclaimed. Avoid: “pulpit.”
Lectern
Lectionary = The book that contains all of the readings from the Scriptures that are used in the celebration of the liturgy.
Lectionary
Liturgical Colors = Colors used in vestments and altar coverings to denote special times in the Church year. Green is used in ordinary time, red denotes solemn feast days, purple denotes penitential times and white is used for joyful occasions including Christmas, Easter and some saints’ feast days.
Liturgical Colors
Liturgy = The public prayer of the Church.
Liturgy
Liturgy of the Eucharist = The section of the celebration when the gifts of bread and wine are prepared and the Eucharistic Prayer is proclaimed by the celebrant, and the Blessed Sacrament is distributed to the assembly.
Liturgy of the Eucharist
Liturgy of the Hours = This is the preferred term in the Latin rite for the official liturgical prayers sanctifying the parts of each day.
Liturgy of the Hours
Liturgy of the Word = That section of the celebration where readings from the Scriptures are proclaimed and reflected upon. On Sundays and major feasts, there are three readings:
Liturgy of the Word
Lord’s Prayer = The prayer of petition for both daily food (which for Christians means also the Eucharistic bread) and the forgiveness of sins.
Lord’s Prayer
Mary = The central point of the theology of Mary is that she is the Mother of God. In traditions since apostolic times, the Church and the faithful have accorded to Mary the highest forms of veneration. She is celebrated in feasts throughout the year, and in devotions such as the rosary and litany and is hailed the patroness of many countries, including the United States.
Mary
Mass = The common name for the Eucharistic liturgy of the Catholic Church. Also referred to as Eucharist, Celebration of the Liturgy, Eucharistic celebration, Sacrifice of the Mass or Lord’s Supper. NOTE: Do not use: “Saying Mass” or “Performing Mass.” Instead use: “Celebrating Mass,” “Concelebrating Mass,” “Celebrating the Liturgy,” or “Celebrating the Eucharist”
part of the Mass Entrance Procession
Mass Entrance Procession
Mass Entrance Procession = A series of actions to initiate the beginning of the Mass.
Entrance Song/Music = part of the Mass Entrance Procession to initiate the beginning of the Mass.
Entrance Song = part of the Mass Entrance Procession to initiate the beginning of the Mass.
Entrance Music = part of the Mass Entrance Procession to initiate the beginning of the Mass.
Veneration of the Altar
Veneration of the Altar = part of the Mass Entrance Procession to initiate the beginning of the Mass.
Greeting
Greeting = part of the Mass Entrance Procession to initiate the beginning of the Mass.
Penitential Rite
Penitential Rite = part of the Mass Entrance Procession to initiate the beginning of the Mass.
Gloria
Gloria = part of the Mass Entrance Procession to initiate the beginning of the Mass.
Opening Prayer
Opening Prayer = part of the Mass Entrance Procession to initiate the beginning of the Mass.
Liturgy of the Word
Liturgy of the Word = part of the Mass Entrance Procession to initiate the beginning of the Mass.
Responsorial Psalm
Responsorial Psalm = part of the Mass Entrance Procession to initiate the beginning of the Mass.
Alleluia Acclamation
Alleluia Acclamation = part of the Mass Entrance Procession to initiate the beginning of the Mass.
Homily
Profession of Faith
General Intercessions
Liturgy of the Eucharist
Blessed Sacrament
Preparation of the Gifts
Offertory Song
Incense
Washing of Hands
Prayer Over the Gifts
Eucharistic Prayer
Preface Dialogue
Consecration
Intercessions
Amen
Lord ’s Prayer (“Our Father…”
Doxology
Sign of Peace
Breaking of the Bread
Lamb of God (“Agnus Dei ”)
Holy Communion
Communion Song
Prayer After Communion
Concluding Rite

Master of Ceremonies One who assists in the preparation of the liturgy and is present to facilitate the movement of the entire celebration.

Matrimony The Roman, Orthodox and Old Catholic churches consider matrimony a sacrament and refer to it as the Sacrament of Matrimony. This is a marriage contract between baptized persons.

Metropolitan The archbishop of an archdiocese in a province. He has limited supervisory powers and influence over the other dioceses and bishops in the province.

Military Ordinariate (Archdiocese for the Military Services, U.S.A.)Nonterritorial diocese for U.S. Catholics and their dependents who are in the military or affiliated with the armed forces.

Minister From the Latin word for “servant,” in the ecclesiastical sense a minister is (1) an ordained cleric or (2) one who has the authority to minister to others.

Ministers of Communion Those who assist in the distribution of Communion; also called Eucharistic Ministers.

Miracles, Apparitions Generally “miracle” is used to refer to physical phenomena that defy natural explanation, such as medically unexplainable cures. An apparition is a supernatural manifestation of God, an angel or a saint to an individual or a group of individuals.

Mitre A headdress worn at some liturgical functions by bishops, abbots and, in certain cases, other clerics.

Monastery An autonomous community house of a religious order, which may or may not be a monastic order. The term is used more specifically to refer to a community house of men or women religious in which they lead a contemplative life separate from the world.

Monk - Friar A man who belongs to one of the monastic orders in the Church, such as Basilians, Benedictines, Cistercians and Carthusians.

Monsignor An honorary ecclesiastical title granted by the Pope to some diocesan priests. In the United States, the title is given to the vicar general of a diocese. In Europe, the title also is given to bishops.

National Conference of Catholic Bishops (NCCB) Episcopal conference of U.S. bishops. The membership is comprised of diocesan bishops and their auxiliary bishops. The conference decides matters of ecclesiastical law and issues policy statements on political and social issues. Newman Apostolate An apostolate to the Catholic college and university community, now commonly known as “campus ministry.”

Nun 1) Strictly, a member of a religious order of women with solemn vows; 2) in general, all women religious, even those in simple vows who are more properly called sisters.

Offertory Song Music used during the presentation of gifts to the celebrant and as the altar is prepared for the Liturgy of the Eucharist.

Opening Prayer This prayer by the celebrant expresses the general theme of the celebration.

Opus Dei Literal translation: the work of the Lord. A personal prelature dedicated to spreading through society an awareness of the call to Christian virtue, awareness, and witness in one’s life and work. Members are not of a religious order, do not take vows, but sometimes live in community.

Ordain - Ordination The proper terms in Catholic usage for references to the conferral of the sacrament of Holy Orders on a deacon, priest or bishop.

Order, Congregation, Society A religious order is the title loosely applied to all religious groups of men and women. A society is a body of clerics, regular or secular, organized for the purpose of performing an apostolic work. A congregation is any group bound together by common rules.

Ordinary Diocesan bishops, religious superiors, and certain other diocesan authorities with jurisdiction over the clergy in a specific geographical area, or the members of a religious order.

Pallium Special stole made of lamb’s wool worn over the chasuble by the Pope and archbishops; it signifies communion of archbishops with the Holy See.

Papal Infallibility The end result of divine assistance given to the Pope through which he is prevented from the possibility and liability of error in teachings involving Church dogma and articles of faith.

Papal Representatives The three types of representatives of the Roman Pontiff are:
1) Legate - An individual appointed by the Pope to be his personal representative to a nation, international conference, or local church. The legate may be chosen from the local clergy of a country.
2) Apostolic Nuncio - In the United States, the papal representative is sent by the Pope to both the local church and the government. His title is Nuncio. Although he holds the title of ambassador, under U.S. law he is not accorded the special privilege of being the dean of the diplomatic corps. In countries where he is dean of the diplomatic corps, his title is Apostolic Nuncio.
3) Permanent Observer to the United Nations - The Apostolic See maintains permanent legates below the ambassadorial level to several world organizations. Since the Papal Legate does not enjoy the right to vote within the organization, his title at the United Nations is that of Observer.

Parish A specific community of the Christian Faithful within a diocese, which has its own church building and is under the authority of a pastor who is responsible for providing the faithful with ministerial service. Most parishes are formed on a geographic basis, but they may be formed along national or ethnic lines.

Parish Coordinator A deacon, religious, or lay person who is responsible for the pastoral care of a parish. The parish coordinator is in charge of the day-to-day life of the parish in the areas of worship, education, pastoral service and administration.

Pastor A priest in charge of a parish or congregation. He is responsible for administering the sacraments, instructing the congregation in the doctrine of the Church and other services to the people of the parish.

Pastoral Associate A member of the laity who is part of a parish ministry team.

Pastoral Council A group of members of the parish who advise the pastor on parish matters; also called a Parish Council.

Pastoral Council, Archdiocesan A consultative group appointed by the Archbishop from members of the clergy, religious orders and laity. Under the direction of the Archbishop, members investigate, consider and propose practical conclusions for the pastoral work of the Archdiocese. The council’s lay members are chosen to represent the various regions and social conditions of the entire Archdiocese.

Paten The plate used to hold the bread.

Pectoral Cross A cross worn on a chain about the neck of bishops and abbots as a sign of office.

Penitential Rite A general acknowledgment of sinfulness by the entire assembly, accompanied by requests for God’s mercy and forgiveness.

Pontiff/Pontifical Pontiff is used as an alternative form of reference to the Pope. Pontifical has to do with the Pope.

Prayer The raising of the mind and heart to God in adoration, thanksgiving, reparation and petition. The official prayer of the Church as a worshipping community is called liturgy.

Prayer After Communion The final prayer by the celebrant in which he petitions that the Sacrament be beneficial for all.

Prayer Over the Gifts The prayer by the celebrant asking that the gifts to be offered be made holy and acceptable in the eyes of the Lord.

Preface Dialogue The introductory dialogue between the celebrant and assembly in which all are invited to join in prayer and thanksgiving to God. The Holy, Holy, Holy The response of the community to the preface and a continuation of the general theme of praise and thanks. Also called the Sanctus.

Preparation of the Gifts The time in the Mass when the bread and wine to be used in the celebration are brought to the celebrant, usually by representatives of the faithful.

Presbyteral Council A consultative group of priests that assists the Archbishop in his governing of the Archdiocese. Council members are representative of all priests in the Archdiocese and include priests elected by fellow priests, priests included by virtue of the offices they hold (ex officio) and priests appointed by the Archbishop.

Presbyterate Presbyteral Council - A consultative group of priests that assists the Archbishop in his governing of the Archdiocese. Council members are representative of all priests in the Archdiocese and include priests elected by fellow priests, priests included by virtue of the offices they hold (ex officio) and priests appointed by the Archbishop.

Presbyterial Council Also known as the priests’ council, this is the principal consultative body mandated by the Code of Canon Law to advise the diocesan bishop in matters of pastoral governance. It consists of bishops and priests serving the diocese.

Primacy Papal primacy refers to the Pope’s authority over the whole Church.

Processional Cross The cross carried in the processions.

Profession of Faith The assembly together recalls and proclaims the fundamental teachings of the Roman Catholic faith. The Profession of Faith, also referred to as the Creed, is used on all Sundays and Holy Days.

Proselytize To bring one to another’s viewpoint whether in religion or other areas.

Province 1) A territory comprising one archdiocese called the metropolitan see and one or more dioceses called suffragan sees. The head of an archdiocese, an archbishop, has metropolitan rights and responsibilities over the province. 2) A division of a religious order under the jurisdiction of a provincial superior.

Purgatory The state or condition in which those who have died in the state of grace, but with some attachment to sin, suffer for a time before they are admitted to the glory and happiness of heaven.

Reader One who proclaims the scriptures during the Liturgy of the Word. Known formerly as "Lector."

Relics The physical remains and effects of saints, which are considered worthy of veneration inasmuch as they represent people who are with God.

Religion The adoration and service of God as expressed through divine worship and acts of faith in daily life.

Religious Movements Groups of people, both lay and clerical, who band together to promote a certain belief or activity.

Religious Priest/Diocesan Priest Religious priests are professed members of a religious order or institute. Religious clergy live according to the rule of their respective orders. In pastoral ministry, they are under the jurisdiction of their local bishop, as well as the superiors of their order. Diocesan, or secular, priests are under the direction of their local bishop. They commit to serving their congregations and other institutions.

Responsorial Psalm Between the first and second readings, a psalm is spoken or sung by the entire assembly. The response is repeated after each verse. If sung, a cantor or choir sings the verses of the psalm.

Retreat A period of time spent in meditation and religious exercise. Retreats may take various forms, from traditional closed forms, to open retreats which do not disengage the participants from day-to-day life. Both clergy and lay people of all ages participate in retreats. Houses and centers providing facilities for retreats are called retreat houses.

Rite of Christi an Initiation of Adults The norms and rituals of the Catholic Church for people who wish to join the Church. Part of the process is intended for baptized Christians who wish to become Catholics. The term is used in a general sense to refer to the process of entering the Catholic Church.

Roman Curia The official collective name for the administrative agencies and courts, and their officials, who assist the Pope in governing the Church. Members are appointed and granted authority by the Pope.

Rome - Diocese of The City of Rome is the diocese of the Pope, who also serves as the Bishop of Rome.

Rosary A prayer of meditation primarily on events in the lives of Mary and Jesus, repeating the Our Father, the Hail Mary and the Glory Be. Generally, the rosary is said on a physical circlet of beads.

Sacramentary The book used by the celebrant, containing all the prayers for the liturgy of the Mass.

Sanctuary The part of the church where the altar is located.

Second Vatican Council A major meeting of the Bishops of the world convened by Pope John XXIII to bring about a renewal of the Church for the second half of the 20th century. It ran from 1962 to 1965 and produced important documents involving liturgy, ecumenism, communications and other areas.

Secular Institutes Societies of men and women living in the world who dedicate themselves to observe the evangelical counsels and to carry on apostolic works suitable to their talents and opportunities in every day life.

Seminary An educational institution for men preparing for the priesthood or diaconate.

Shrine Erected to encourage private devotions to a saint. It usually contains a picture, statue or other religious feature capable of inspiring devotional prayer.

Sign of Peace Before sharing the Body of Christ the members of the assembly are invited to express their love and peace with one another.

Sign of the Cross A sign, ceremonial gesture or movement in the form of a cross by which a person professes faith in the Holy Trinity, and intercedes for the blessing of himself, as well as other persons or things.

Sister Any woman religious, in popular speech. Strictly, the title applies to those women religious belonging to institutes whose members have not professed solemn vows, most of which were established during and since the 19th century.

Sodality A group of laity, established for the promotion of Christian life and worship, or some other religious purpose.

Stations of the Cross Also known as The Way of the Cross, this devotion to the suffering of Christ consists of prayers and meditations on fourteen occurrences experienced by Jesus on His way to His crucifixion and death. Each of these events is represented by a cross. Stations can be done individually, or in groups with one person leading the prayers and moving from cross to cross.

Stole The vestment worn around the neck by all ordained ministers. For priests, bishops and Pope, it hangs down in front (under the chasuble); deacons wear it over their left shoulder crossed and fastened at the right side.

Superior The head of a religious order or congregation. He or she may be the head of a province or of an individual house.

Surplice A loose, flowing vestment of white fabric with wide sleeves. For some functions it is inter-changeable with an alb.

Synod A gathering of designated officials and representatives of a church, with legislative and policymaking powers.

Tabernacle Place in the Church where the Eucharist or sacred species are stored.

Theologate An institution which provides the last four years of study for candidates for the priesthood.

Theology The study of God and religion, deriving from and based on the data of divine Revelation, organized and systematized according to an academic method.

Titular Sees Dioceses where the Church once flourished but which later died out. Bishops without a territorial or residential diocese of their own, e.g., auxiliary bishops, are given titular sees.

Tribunal A tribunal (court) is the name given to the person or persons who exercise the Church’s judicial powers.

United States Catholic Conference (USCC) Civil corporation and executive agency of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops.

Vatican Congregation A Vatican body that is responsible for an important area in the life of the Church, such as worship and sacraments, the clergy, and of saints causes.

Vatican Councils Councils of all bishops of the Church called by the Pope. These councils usually are called to discuss specific matters of interest to the Church.

Veneration of the Altar The revering of the altar with a kiss and the optional use of incense.

Vespers A portion of the Church’s divine office recited each day by priests. (see Evening Prayer)

Vestment The vesture ministers wear.

Vow A promise made to God with sufficient knowledge and freedom, which has as its object a moral good that is possible and better than its voluntary omission.

Washing of Hands An expression of the desire for inward purification. The celebrant washes his hands in symbolic cleansing to prepare himself just as the gifts have been prepared as an offering to the Lord.

Witness, Christian Practical testimony or evidence given by Christians regarding their faith. They may witness their faith in all circumstances of life—by prayer and general conduct, through good example and good works, etc. – and by being and acting in accordance with Christian belief, while actually practicing the Christian faith.

Zucchetto The skullcap of Roman Catholic clerics. The Pope wears a white zucchetto, Cardinals wear red zuchettos, Bishops wear purple zucchettos and priests wear black zucchettos.



annulment
annulment = Technically called a decree of nullity, is a sentence by a church court, confirmed by an appellate court, that a putative marriage was not valid from the start because something was lacking: full knowledge and consent by both parties, freedom from force or grave fear, or some other factor needed for a valid marriage. "Putative" (meaning apparent or seeming) is a key word in the entire process: It refers to a marriage in which at least one party acted in good faith, believing it was valid at the time it took place. Children from a putative marriage are considered legitimate even if the marriage is later ruled to be invalid. This has been a source of one of the major popular misunderstandings of annulments; namely, that an annulment somehow makes the children of that union illegitimate. Church law explicitly rejects this interpretation, saying that children of a putative marriage are legitimate even if the marriage is later judged to be invalid.

apostolic nuncio
apostolic = Church term for the Vatican ambassador to another country and the papal liaison with the church in that country. An apostolic nuncio, also called a papal nuncio, is always an archbishop, and it is his religious title that is capitalized as a title before his name, e.g., Archbishop Carlo Maria Viganò, apostolic nuncio to the United States, not Apostolic Nuncio Carlo Maria Viganò. See religious titles before names. In a country with which the Vatican does not have diplomatic relations, the official Vatican liaison with the church there is called an apostolic delegate. Papal representatives in the United States were apostolic delegates until 1984, when full diplomatic relations were established. There was a brief period, from 1984 to 1991, when the Vatican ambassador to the United States was called the pro-nuncio because he was not the dean of the world's ambassadors to the United States (a position that under a Vienna convention is automatically given to the Vatican ambassador in many countries but in other countries is given to the senior foreign ambassador, wherever he is from). In 1991 the Vatican quit using pro-nuncio as the title for its ambassadors who were not deans of the ambassadorial corps and began calling all papal representatives with full rank of ambassador nuncio.

archbishop
archbishop = The title given automatically to bishops who govern archdioceses. It is also given to certain other high-ranking church officials, notably Vatican ambassadors (apostolic nuncios: see that entry), the secretaries of Vatican congregations and the presidents of pontifical councils. Adj. archepiscopal.

archdiocese
archdiocese = The chief diocese of an ecclesiastical province (see province and metropolitan). It is governed by an archbishop. Adj. archdiocesan. See diocese and archeparchy.

archeparchy
archeparchy = The chief diocese of an Eastern Catholic ecclesiastical province. In most contexts it can be called an archdiocese, but if some legal distinction between Eastern and Latin Catholic jurisdictions is important, it may be necessary to introduce the term. The head of an archeparchy is called an archeparch, but in most contexts he can be called an archbishop. There are only two Catholic archeparchies in the United States: the Byzantine Catholic Archdiocese of Pittsburgh and the Ukrainian Catholic Archdiocese of Philadelphia. See eparchy.

auxiliary bishop
auxiliary bishop = A bishop assigned to a Catholic diocese or archdiocese to assist its residential bishop. Whether in a diocese or archdiocese, his title is bishop.

bishop
bishop = The highest order of ordained ministry in Catholic teaching. Most bishops are diocesan bishops, the chief priests in their respective dioceses. But some (auxiliary bishops) are the top assistants to their diocesan bishops, and some priests are made bishops because of special posts they hold in the church, such as certain Vatican jobs. Diocesan bishops and their auxiliaries are responsible for the pastoral care of their dioceses. In some cases diocesan bishops are assigned a coadjutor bishop, who is like an auxiliary except that he automatically becomes the diocesan bishop when his predecessor resigns or dies. See auxiliary bishop and coadjutor. In addition to their diocesan responsibilities, all bishops have a responsibility to act in council with other bishops to guide the church. Adj. episcopal.

bishops' conference
bishops' conference = A national (or in a very few cases regional) body of bishops that meets periodically to collaborate on matters of common concern in their country or region, such as moral, doctrinal, pastoral and liturgical questions; relations with other religious groups; and public policy issues. It is also called an episcopal conference. The U.S. conference is the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, or USCCB. See that entry.

brother
brother = A man who has taken vows in a religious order but is not ordained or studying for the priesthood. Sometimes he is called a lay brother to distinguish him from clerical members of religious orders. See lay.

canon
canon = Greek for rule, norm, standard or measure, it is used in several ways in church language. (1) The canon of Sacred Scripture is the list of books recognized by the church as inspired by the Holy Spirit. (2) Before the liturgical reforms of the Second Vatican Council, the single eucharistic prayer used universally in the Latin Mass was called the Roman Canon. Now that there are four eucharistic prayers in general use, they are usually referred to as Eucharistic Prayer I, II, III or IV, but they may also be called canons. The first of these is still called the Roman Canon because it is nearly identical to the original Roman Canon. (3) Canon is another name for a law in the Code of Canon Law. Adj. canonical. See also canon law.

canon law
canon law = A code of ecclesiastical laws governing the Catholic Church. In the Latin or Western Church, the governing code is the 1983 Code of Canon Law, a revision of the 1917 Code of Canon Law. A separate but parallel Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches, issued in 1990, governs the Eastern Catholic churches. That document was the first comprehensive code of church law governing all Eastern Catholic churches.

cardinal = Highest-ranking Catholic clergy below the pope. By church law cardinals are regarded as the pope's closest advisors, and when a pope dies those who are not yet 80 years old meet in a conclave in Rome to elect a new pope. Most cardinals are archbishops; canon law since 1983 says they must at least be bishops, but exceptions have been made in several cases where a noted priest-theologian over the age of 80 has been named a cardinal to honor his theological contributions to the church. See College of Cardinals.
cardinal
celibacy = Refers to a decision to live chastely in the unmarried state. At ordination, a diocesan priest or unmarried deacon in the Latin rite Catholic Church makes a promise of celibacy. The promise should not be called a "vow." Adj. celibate. See chastity.
celibacy
chancellor = The chief archivist of a diocese's official records. Also a notary and secretary of the diocesan curia, or central administration; he or she may have a variety of other duties as well. It is the highest diocesan position open to women.
chancellor
chastity = In its general sense chastity does not mean abstinence from sexual activity as such, but rather moral sexual conduct. Marital chastity means faithfulness to one's spouse and moral conduct in marital relations. The religious vow of chastity taken by brothers, sisters and priests in religious orders is a religious promise to God to live the virtue of chastity by not marrying and by abstaining from sexual activity. When diocesan priests and unmarried deacons make a promise of celibacy, they are not taking religious vows; their commitment to live chastely in an unmarried state should be described as a promise, not a vow. See celibacy.
chastity
church = Apart from its obvious use to refer to a building where Christians gather to worship God, church has a rich theological and doctrinal meaning for Catholics that also sets limits on how it is applied. The local or particular church means the (arch)diocese, the community of faithful gathered around the altar under its bishop. Each particular church has all the necessary means of salvation according to Catholic teaching—that is, fidelity to apostolic teaching, assured by ordained ministry in apostolic succession; the seven sacraments accepted throughout Christianity before the Reformation; and all the communal means to holiness that God grants through his graces. The universal church—the meaning of catholic church, lowercased—is the communion of all those particular churches spread throughout the world who are in union with the bishop of Rome and who share in fidelity to apostolic teaching and discipleship to Christ. Catholics also recognize the mainline Orthodox churches as churches; and until the recent ordination of women in several Old Catholic churches of the Union of Utrecht, the Catholic Church had recognized Union of Utrecht churches as churches. Christian churches which share partially in the historic apostolic communities of Christian discipleship, but which in the Catholic Church's perspective do not have the fullness of apostolic succession in their bishops or ordained ministry, are called ecclesial communions, rather than churches. This position, strongly affirmed by the world's Catholic bishops at the Second Vatican Council and reaffirmed in numerous church documents since then, remains a topic of considerable disagreement in ecumenical dialogues. In Catholic teaching the church embraces all its members—not only those still living on earth, but also those in heaven or purgatory. The ancient teaching that outside the church there is no salvation (extra ecclesiam nulla salus) has been officially nuanced in church teaching to include many who do not explicitly embrace the church and all its teachings, or even many who join no Christian religion. The teaching affirms the central role and responsibility of the church to reach out to all people with the Gospel message while acknowledging that those who have not been apprised or convinced of that message may still be saved if they live upright lives in accord with their own convictions and understanding of God.
church
clergy = In Catholic usage, a collective term referring to all those ordained—bishops, priests and deacons—who administer the rites of the church. Adj. clerical.
clergy
coadjutor = A bishop appointed to a Catholic diocese or archdiocese to assist the diocesan bishop. Unlike an auxiliary bishop—see auxiliary bishop—he has the right of succession, meaning that he automatically becomes the new bishop when the diocesan bishop retires or dies. By canon law, he is also vicar general of the diocese. If the diocese is an archdiocese, he is called coadjutor archbishop instead of coadjutor bishop. In recent years a growing number of U.S. bishops in larger dioceses or archdioceses have requested and received a coadjutor in the final year or two before their retirement, in order to familiarize their successor with the workings of the (arch)diocese before he has to take over the reins.
coadjutor
College of Cardinals = A group of men chosen by the pope as his chief advisers. Most are heads of major dioceses around the world or of the major departments of the Vatican, or are retired from such posts. In the interregnum following the death of the pope, the College of Cardinals administers the church, and those under the age of 80 meet in a conclave to elect a new pope.
College of Cardinals
collegiality = The shared responsibility and authority that the whole college of bishops, headed by the pope, has for the teaching, sanctification and government of the church.
collegiality
conclave = The gathering of the world's Catholic cardinals, after the death of a pope, to elect a new pope. Only cardinals under the age of 80 are allowed into a conclave under current church rules.
conclave
congregation = (1) A term used for some Vatican departments that are responsible for important areas of church life, such as worship and sacraments, the clergy, and saints' causes. 
congregation = (2) The proper legal term for some institutes of men or women religious, all of which are commonly called religious orders. The difference between a religious congregation and a religious order is technical and rarely of significance in news reporting. (3) Any gathering of Christians for worship.
congregation
consistory = A meeting of cardinals in Rome. It can be an ordinary consistory, attended only by cardinals in Rome at the time of the meeting, or an extraordinary consistory, to which all cardinals around the world are summoned.
consistory
curia = The personnel and offices through which (1) the pope administers the affairs of the universal church (the Roman Curia), or (2) a bishop administers the affairs of a diocese (the diocesan curia). The principal officials of a diocesan curia are the vicar general, the chancellor, officials of the diocesan tribunal or court, examiners, consultors, auditors and notaries. When referring to the Roman Curia, Roman Curia and Curia used alone are usually capitalized (like Senate when referring to the U.S. Senate), but curia is not capitalized in reference to a diocesan curia unless it is part of a full proper name.
curia
deacon, diaconate = In the Catholic Church, the diaconate is the first of three ranks in ordained ministry. Deacons preparing for the priesthood are transitional deacons. Those not planning to be ordained priests are called permanent deacons. Married men may be ordained permanent deacons, but only unmarried men committed to lifelong celibacy can be ordained deacons if they are planning to become priests. Adj. diaconal.
deacon
deacon = In the Catholic Church, the diaconate is the first of three ranks in ordained ministry. Deacons preparing for the priesthood are transitional deacons. Those not planning to be ordained priests are called permanent deacons. Married men may be ordained permanent deacons, but only unmarried men committed to lifelong celibacy can be ordained deacons if they are planning to become priests. Adj. diaconal.
diaconate
diaconate = In the Catholic Church, the diaconate is the first of three ranks in ordained ministry. Deacons preparing for the priesthood are transitional deacons. Those not planning to be ordained priests are called permanent deacons. Married men may be ordained permanent deacons, but only unmarried men committed to lifelong celibacy can be ordained deacons if they are planning to become priests. Adj. diaconal.
defrocking = See laicization.
defrocking
delict = The church term for a crime. Church crimes are spelled out in the Code of Canon Law for the Latin rite and in the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches for Eastern Catholic churches.
delict
diaconate = See deacon, diaconate.
diaconate
dicastery = A church term for one of the major departments of the Roman Curia—the Secretariat of State, Vatican congregations, tribunals, pontifical councils and a few other departments. The term does not appear with this definition in most English dictionaries, which is part of the reason it is listed here. It ordinarily does not come into play in news coverage of the Vatican, but it may do so in certain limited contexts. Generally, it is more appropriate to refer to a Vatican dicastery by its more specific proper name: congregation, pontifical council, etc.
dicastery
diocesan bishop = A bishop who heads a diocese. He may be assisted by auxiliary bishops or a coadjutor bishop (see auxiliary bishop and coadjutor). Also sometimes referred to as a residential bishop.
diocesan bishop
diocesan curia = The personnel and offices assisting the bishop in directing the pastoral activity, administration and exercise of judicial power of a diocese.
diocesan curia
diocese = A particular church; the ordinary territorial division of the church headed by a bishop. The chief diocese of a group of dioceses is called an archdiocese; see that entry. Adj. diocesan.
diocese
Eastern Catholic Churches = The Catholic Churches with origins in Eastern Europe, Asia and Africa that have their own distinctive liturgical, legal and organizational systems and are identified by the national or ethnic character of their region of origin. Each is considered fully equal to the Latin tradition within the church. In the United States there are 15 Eastern Church dioceses and two Eastern Church archdioceses. In addition, there is one non-territorial Eastern Church apostolate in the United States whose bishop is a member of the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops. See archeparchy and eparchy.
Eastern Catholic Churches
eparchy = Eastern Catholic equivalent to a diocese in the Latin Church. It is under the pastoral care of an eparch (bishop). Unless some legal distinction between a Latin rite diocese and an Eastern Church eparchy is relevant to a news report, in most cases it is appropriate to refer to an eparchy as a diocese and to its leader as a bishop. Adj. eparchial. See archeparchy.
eparchy
episcopal = Refers to a bishop or groups of bishops, or to the form of church governance in which ordained bishops have authority.
episcopal
episcopal vicar = A priest or auxiliary bishop who assists the diocesan bishop in a specific part of the diocese, over certain groups in the diocese, or over certain areas of church affairs. Some large dioceses, for example, are divided geographically into several vicariates or regions, with an episcopal vicar for each; some dioceses have episcopal vicars for clergy or religious or for Catholics of certain racial or ethnic groups. See vicar general.
episcopal vicar
excommunication = A penalty or censure by which a baptized Catholic is excluded from the communion of the faithful for committing and remaining obstinate in certain serious offenses specified in canon law. Even though excommunicated, the person is still responsible for fulfillment of the normal obligations of a Catholic.
excommunication
faculty = Church authorization, given by the law itself or by a church superior, to perform certain official church acts. In some rare cases a member of the clergy will be denied certain faculties, such as hearing confessions or preaching during the liturgy, because of public positions taken that are not in accord with church teaching.
faculty
finance council = A diocesan body mandated by the Code of Canon Law that is charged with preparing the annual diocesan budget and annually reviewing diocesan expenses and revenues. The finance council must be consulted for financial transactions of a given dollar level undertaken by the bishop and must give its consent to transactions at another dollar threshold. The threshold amounts are established periodically by an agreement with the Holy See and are currently subject to annual inflation changes determined by the cost of living index.
finance council
hierarchy = In Catholic usage, the term is used most commonly to refer collectively to the bishops of the world or a particular region. In technical uses, however, it may refer to all those who are ordained: deacons and priests as well as bishops. In the canon law of the Eastern Catholic Churches, hierarchs is a term regularly used to describe the bishops of a church when describing their collective authority or function.
hierarchy
Holy See = The primary official term of reference for the Diocese of Rome, as the chief diocese of Catholic Christendom; used to refer to the pope and the Roman Curia—congregations, tribunals, and various other offices—in their role of authority over and service to the Catholic Church around the world. In most news uses, Vatican is synonymous with Holy See: A Holy See representative is a Vatican representative, a congregation of the Holy See is a Vatican congregation, etc.
Holy See
laicization = The process by which a priest is returned to the lay state. It is sometimes used as a penalty for a serious crime or scandal, but more often it comes at the request of the priest. A laicized priest is barred from all priestly ministry with one exception: He may give absolution to someone in immediate danger of death. The pope must approve all requests for laicization. When a priest is laicized without his consent, for a crime such as living in concubinage, committing child sexual abuse or using the confessional to solicit sex, it is sometimes called defrocking or unfrocking. Those terms, which are not used in church law, should be restricted to forcible laicizations, since they connote a penalty.
laicization
laity/lay = In canon law, anyone not ordained a deacon, priest or bishop is a layperson. In this legal sense women religious (sisters) and unordained men religious (brothers) are laity. In the documents of the Second Vatican Council, however, the laity are those who are neither ordained nor members of a religious order. The Vatican II sense is the one usually intended in most discussions of laypeople and their role in the church.
laity/lay
lay ecclesial ministry = Not a specific job title, but a general theological description of the work of Catholics who are not ordained but are engaged in substantial public leadership positions in church ministry, collaborating closely with the ordained leadership and working under their authority. In the United States well over 30,000 such lay ministers—an average of more than 1.6 per parish nationwide—are employed by Catholic parishes in full- or part-time positions of more than 20 hours a week. Among those who are in paid posts, about 40% are coordinators of religious education. Their other key ministries include general pastoral associate, youth minister, music minister, and liturgical planner or coordinator. Tens of thousands of other Catholics engage in volunteer lay ministry in U.S. parishes as catechists; as readers, altar servers, music leaders or other liturgical ministers; as social justice ministers; or in a variety of other health, charity, service or church-related ministries. Ecclesial is reserved to those who are in church-recognized leadership positions, generally certified to represent the church in their area of expertise after appropriate human, spiritual, intellectual and pastoral formation. In a 2005 document, Co-Workers in the Vineyard of the Lord, the U.S. bishops encouraged the growth of lay ecclesial ministry and set out general guidelines for the formation and the recognition or certification of such ministers.
lay ecclesial ministry
liturgy = The general term for all the church's official acts of worship. It includes the Mass (also called the Eucharistic liturgy), the celebration of the other sacraments, and the Liturgy of the Hours, which contains the official prayers recited by priests and some others to sanctify parts of the day. See Mass, sacraments and vespers.
liturgy
Mass = The central act of worship in the Catholic Church. In most Eastern Catholic churches the Mass is called the Divine Liturgy. The Mass is divided into two main parts. The Liturgy of the Word includes Scripture readings and a homily and ends with the general intercessions. The Liturgy of the Eucharist begins with the offering of the gifts, followed by consecration of the bread and wine and the reception of Communion. Catholics believe that in the consecration the bread and wine truly become the body and blood of Christ.
Mass
metropolitan = A metropolitan see is an archdiocese that is the chief diocese of an ecclesiastical province. The archbishop who heads that province is called the metropolitan, but usually only in contexts referring to him in his capacity as head of the province. See province.
metropolitan
ministry = A broad term in Catholic usage for any activity conducive to the salvation of souls. It can include ordained ministry such as liturgical leadership and administration of the sacraments, or lay ministry such as instructing children in the faith, serving the poor, visiting the sick, or being an altar server, reader or music leader at Mass. See lay ecclesial ministry.
ministry
monsignor = An honorary ecclesiastical title granted by the pope to some diocesan priests. Priests in religious orders or congregations never receive the title of monsignor. In English the standard abbreviation as a title before the name is Msgr. American publications vary in whether they use the abbreviation or the full word before the name in news reporting. In covering the church internationally, however, it is also important to realize that the Catholic Church and news agencies in many other nations use Msgr. or Mgr. as the religious title before the name of bishops and archbishops, not just before the name of priests who have received that honorary ecclesiastical title from the pope. Check on the Web or in other resources to determine whether the man in question is a bishop or just a priest who has an honorary title from the pope.
monsignor
nun = (1) Strictly speaking, a member of a religious order of women with solemn vows. 
nun = (2) In general, all women religious, even those in simple vows, who are more properly called sisters. Whether a woman religious is a nun or sister in a strict canonical sense, in news reporting it is appropriate to use the term Sister as the religious title before her name.
nun
ordinary = A diocesan bishop or his equivalent, his vicar general and episcopal vicar, or a major superior of a clerical religious order, congregation or society. It refers to someone with ordinary authority in church law over a group of clergy, over certain pastoral concerns in a specific geographical area or over the members of a religious order. The term ordinary was formerly restricted to diocesan bishops and major superiors of religious orders, but it was expanded in the 1983 Code of Canon Law to include vicars general and episcopal vicars. It is not uncommon for bishops and other church officials schooled in the previous canon law code to use the term ordinary mistakenly to refer only to diocesan bishops or major superiors of men religious. If a church official uses the term in this more restricted former use, it is wise to question him or her on what he or she means by the term.
ordinary
papal nuncio = See apostolic nuncio.
papal nuncio
parish = A specific community of the Christian faithful within a diocese, having its own church building, under the authority of a pastor who is responsible for providing ministerial service. Most parishes are formed on a geographic basis, but they may be formed along national or ethnic lines.
parish
pastor = A priest in charge of a Catholic parish or congregation. He is responsible for administering the sacraments, instructing the congregation in the doctrine of the church, and providing other services to the people of the parish. Pastor is not ordinarily used as a title before the name of a Catholic priest: He is Father John Smith or Msgr. John Smith or the Rev. John Smith, depending on your publication's style manual.
pastor
pastoral council = A parish or (arch)diocesan body that the pastor or (arch)bishop consults concerning policies and major decisions in the governance of the local church. Such a council's role is consultative and always subject to the final authority of the pastor or bishop.
pastoral council
presbyteral council = Also known as the priests' council, this is the principal consultative body mandated by the Code of Canon Law to advise the diocesan bishop in matters of pastoral governance. It consists of bishops and priests serving the diocese.
presbyteral council
presbyterate = May be a synonym for priesthood or may refer to the collective body of priests of a diocese or similar ecclesiastical jurisdiction.
presbyterate
province = (1) A grouping of an archdiocese, called the metropolitan see, and the dioceses under it, called suffragan sees. The Code of Canon Law spells out certain limited obligations and authority that the metropolitan archbishop has with respect to the dioceses within his province. 
province = (2) A grouping of communities of a religious order under the jurisdiction of a provincial superior.
province
diocesan priest = Religious priests are professed members of a religious order or institute. Religious clergy live according to the rule of their respective orders. In pastoral ministry, they are under the jurisdiction of their local bishop, as well as of the superiors of their order. Diocesan, or secular, priests are under the direction of their local bishop. Most serve in the parishes of the diocese, but they may also be assigned to other diocesan posts and ministries or be released for service outside the diocese.
diocesan priest
treligious priest = Religious priests are professed members of a religious order or institute. Religious clergy live according to the rule of their respective orders. In pastoral ministry, they are under the jurisdiction of their local bishop, as well as of the superiors of their order. Diocesan, or secular, priests are under the direction of their local bishop. Most serve in the parishes of the diocese, but they may also be assigned to other diocesan posts and ministries or be released for service outside the diocese.
treligious priest
religious titles before names = In general, Catholics refer to nuns as Sister, religious brothers as Brother and priests as Father, and those religious titles take precedence over whatever job titles they might hold, such as pastor, chancellor, vicar general, associate pastor, executive director. The other chief religious titles for clerics are Msgr., Bishop, Archbishop, Cardinal, Pope and, for the head of a male monastic community, Abbot. For many members of religious orders, the short version of their order's name may precede the religious title: Mercy Sister Mary Smith, Jesuit Father John Smith, Benedictine Brother Peter Smith. In certain cases it may be better to use an appositive phrase or some other approach: Sister Janet Smith, a School Sister of Notre Dame, rather than School Sister of Notre Dame Sister Janet Smith.
religious titles before names
sacraments = Catholics, like Orthodox Christians, believe that there are seven sacraments: baptism, confirmation, Eucharist, penance, matrimony, holy orders and the anointing of the sick. The first three are also called the sacraments of Christian initiation, and in the Eastern Catholic and Orthodox traditions they are administered together in infancy. In the Latin rite Church baptism is administered to infants, but the first reception of the Eucharist (first Communion) and confirmation are typically delayed until the child has reached the use of reason, generally regarded as about the age of seven. Eastern Catholics and Orthodox usually refer to confirmation as chrismation. Penance is also called the sacrament of reconciliation. The anointing of the sick used to be called extreme unction when it was only given to those gravely ill or in danger of death. Now it can be administered to anyone who is seriously or chronically ill.
sacraments
see = Another name for a diocese or archdiocese. It appears in such phrases as Holy See, titular see, metropolitan see, suffragan see, see city. The see city is that city after which the diocese or archdiocese is named. See Holy See, metropolitan, province and titular see.
see
seminary = An educational institution for men preparing for the priesthood.
seminary
sister = In popular speech, any woman religious. Strictly, the title applies to women religious of those institutes, mostly formed during or since the 19th century, whose members do not profess solemn vows. See nun.
sister
superior = The head of a religious order or congregation. He or she may be the head of a province or of an individual house.
superior
suspension = Church penalty under which a priest, while retaining his clerical status, is no longer permitted to perform priestly functions such as celebrating Mass, preaching or administering the sacraments.
suspension
titular see = If a bishop does not have his own diocese, he is given a titular see: that is, a place that once was the seat of a diocese but no longer is. Auxiliary bishops and bishops in Vatican service are examples of those given titular sees. Many titular sees are ancient cities of the Middle East or Northern Africa. But there are some titular sees in the United States as well, such as Bardstown, Ky. (original seat of what is now the Archdiocese of Louisville), or Jamestown, N.D. (now in the Diocese of Fargo). The Annuario Pontificio devotes more than 200 pages to the listing of titular sees, where it gives basic biographical information about the bishops who hold them.
titular see
tribunal = A tribunal (court) is the name given to the person or persons who exercise the church's judicial powers. Each diocese has a diocesan tribunal, used mainly to hear marriage cases. Each archdiocese has an archdiocesan tribunal—a court of first trial—and a metropolitan tribunal, an appeals court that reviews decisions of diocesan courts in that ecclesiastical province when necessary. (The Catholic Church in Canada has a slightly different system, with regional instead of metropolitan appeals courts.)
tribunal
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops (USCCB) = The national membership organization of the Catholic bishops of the United States, through which they act collegially on pastoral, liturgical and public policy matters affecting the Catholic Church in the United States. Episcopal conferences were recommended by the Second Vatican Council and have duties enumerated in the 1983 Code of Canon Law and the 1998 apostolic letter Apostolos Suos. The USCCB traces its origins to the 1919 establishment of the National Catholic Welfare Conference. In 1966, the conference was reorganized as the canonical entity known as the National Conference of Catholic Bishops and its twin civil corporation known as the U.S. Catholic Conference. Another reorganization in 2001 resulted in the USCCB.
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops (USCCB)
vespers = Also called evening prayer, vespers is part of the Liturgy of the Hours, the series of psalms, prayers and readings for different parts of the day that Catholic priests and deacons are obligated to pray daily. Often a new bishop will present his letter of appointment to the priests of the diocese during a vespers service at the cathedral.
vespers
vicar general = A priest, auxiliary bishop or coadjutor bishop who assists the diocesan bishop in the governance of the entire diocese.
vicar general
vow = A promise made to God with sufficient knowledge and freedom. Its purpose must be a moral good that, with God's grace, can be achieved. The promises spouses make to each other when they marry are vows. Men and women entering religious life take vows, typically of poverty, chastity and obedience. Celibacy is not a vow; it should be described as a promise.
vow
